# How to triage bugs

## Packaging bugs or upstream bugs?

It’d be nice to get all upstream bugs tagged as such (`upstream` tag),
forwarded upstream (<http://bugs.freedesktop.org/> for most packages),
and marked as such.

A mail to `control@bugs.debian.org` would look like:

    tag X upstream
    forwarded X https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=Y
    thanks

Then [`bts-link`](http://bts-link.alioth.debian.org/) comes into play
and help us tracking upstream status, which is pretty nice to have.


## Usertags

Another feature of the BTS is usertagging. That lets people keep track
of additional tags, “attached” to a given mail address. For XSF,
that’s `debian-x@lists.debian.org`.

The list of all usertagged bugs can be seen on:
<http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/pkgreport.cgi?users=debian-x@lists.debian.org>;
the list of all used usertags is at the bottom, in the form.

Let’s give some examples:

 * `i810`, `i915`: helps triaging `-video-intel` bugs depending on the
   chipset.
 * `r200`, `r300`: ditto for `-video-ati`.
 * `xset`, `xrandr`: helps triaging `x11-xserver-utils` bugs depending
   on the affected tool (like other `x11-*` packages, that’s a bundle
   of teeny tiny apps).
 * `squeeze-candidate`: helps keeping a list of bugs we’d like to get
   fixed in a point release (through a stable update).

Here’s an example of URL, for the last tag:
<http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/pkgreport.cgi?users=debian-x@lists.debian.org&tag=squeeze-candidate>
— by the way one should keep an eye on the list of found/fixed
versions since those bugs are likely marked as resolved (in `unstable`
or `experimental`), but might still affect a stable release. Maybe we
just need to have both `squeeze-candidate` and `squeeze-accepted`, and
swap usertags when the stable upload happens.


## Categories

The BTS has yet another feature which can help, categories. That’s
based on usertags as well, but one has to use the package address
(`$package@packages.debian.org`), so that’s package-specific rather
than team-specific.

Categories are
[documented on the wiki](http://wiki.debian.org/bugs.debian.org/usertags),
and they would probably be welcome in the `intel` and `ati` cases
above, as well as in the “multiple tools in a single bundle”
cases.. An example of what we could achieve is the
[devscripts bug page](http://bugs.debian.org/devscripts) (it takes
some time to load, plenty of bugs).

Needed steps for that to happen:

 * create usercategories.
 * move usertags from `debian-x@lists.debian.org` to
   `$package@packages.debian.org`, probably using the `bts select`
   command to get the list over which to iterate:
 * profit!

To move the usertags, something like that should do the job:

    # Adding usertags:
    user $package1@packages.debian.org
    usertag X xset
    usertag Y xrandr
    user $package2@packages.debian.org
    usertag Z i810
    
    # Removing tags which are no longer needed:
    user debian-x@lists.debian.org
    usertag X - xset
    usertag Y - xrandr
    usertag Z - i810
